All right,
welcome back everyone. Good morning.
Welcome to the second lecture in the
experience section of statistical
rethinking 2026.
Uh we started with multi-level models
last week. What I want to do today is
pick up exactly where we left off before
and talk about expanding the basic
multi-level model. And uh model
expansion is a big theme of this
section. Uh it's one of the things I'm
going to talk about a lot when you work
on a statistical project. Uh I'm
encouraging you to start with some basic
model which is not your destination. And
then you're going to have choices to
make and expanding that model. uh even
expanding it in one direction towards
the model that will satisfy your
research goal is going to present
choices for you and I want to talk about
how to engineer those choices and deal
with um software issues as you go. uh
metaphor for this. Uh once upon a time
uh people read books, right? And at
least when I was in high school, uh uh
some of the most popular books in the
library were these choose your own
adventure books. Has anybody seen these?
Yeah. Okay, good. I'm not just an old
man who But uh uh these are great things
sorts of books. They are books that you
read through them for a while and then
you have a choice and you get to turn to
different pages and then the story
proceeds in different ways as you go.
Um, and there are lots of branches in
these books. So, for example, here's
one, the island of Time. And you can
represent the branching choices page by
page in these books with these diagrams.
There's this nice website on at Atlas
Obscura which has taken these books and
represents them as branching pathways.
So you start on the left here and each
little arrow is a page and you advance
and then you reach a branching point and
you go different ways and then those
produce additional branches or
conclusions like so in this one you
could die really early
if you go left there. But if you go
right you can live for a bit longer and
so on. And there are um some number of
endings uh here. How many does it say?
12 different endings uh that you can
reach. Uh this is like your data
analysis project, right? Uh you make the
wrong choice, you die early. Yeah. You
make the right choices, it can proceed
for a while. They don't actually die.
You get to start over. Yeah. But there
are uh this is another part of workflow
which I think is very important when we
do research is um having uh valid
heristics and protocols and diagnostics
for making these branching choices as we
go along. Any reasonable sort of
research project is going to have
decisions to make which are not
predetermined because you're discovering
things about the data and about your own
questions and about your software
capabilities as you go and you have to
make choices. Um uh here's another one
that's more complicated. The mystery of
the Maya. Uh this one has going back to
the start. You don't die, right? So this
is more like your actual data analysis,
right? You don't die when you make the
wrong choice. But you you can have
permission to go back to a previous
point where you understood and then
start forward again. Uh that's normal.
It's not cheating. It's a standard
thing. And I think it's the job of
people like me to support um researchers
in these things by developing useful
heruristics for you. This is workflow.
It's different than workflow we talked
about last time. This is also workflow.
Uh but this this graph is structural
workflow. It represents the logic uh
metaphorically the proof of your of your
analysis. And both of these things
coexist in a project. We've got the
dynamic workflow. I'm trying to make up
terminology here as I go, so forgive me.
But we've got like the dynamic aspect of
workflow where you have branching
choices to make because you're
discovering things about your about your
project as you go.
um and that needs support. Uh this is
like process workflow uh how to actually
produce the thing and uh successfully.
And then there's structural workflow
which is like a testament of your
project. Uh right it's part of the
quality assurance that you can say okay
I I went through a bunch of intermediate
stages and now I've developed a project
and here's the logical structure of it.
That's what the right hand side of this
slide represents. Yeah. At least that's
a goal. is something that's a
comprehensible, transparent
uh representation of the logic of your
of your research project. Does this
distinction make some sense? You see
what I'm trying to get at? Now, I'm
going to use the word workflow for both
of these things. Now, I apologize. We
need maybe some new vocabulary here. And
if you've got ideas, I'm I'm all ears uh
about that. I think this is a really
serious issue before I get into the
statistical material for the day because
when we read contemporary scientific
papers um I would say especially in
biology but I'm I'm sure other fields
are like this too I mainly read biology
papers a lot of the papers these days
have 100page supplementals
uh it's it's not plausible that that's
been peer- reviewviewed right and if
you've read any you know they haven't
right so I shouldn't let's just be
honest this. And here's a nice tweet
from Leo Proctor um from a couple years
ago where he was talking about one of
these papers that had like a 150page
supplemental and is like it's it's just
like everything's in there. Uh and it
would take a year to review all of this
stuff um called the software that goes
with it. And he had this joke he calls
it a denial of peer review attack or a
dopra which is a term that I would like
to catch on. Um, this isn't to say that
that's necessarily bad to have all of
that extra science.
It's just when that is published, you
know, it hasn't really been
peer-reviewed. The a goal for us uh
going forward is to think about a
statistical workflow as some way where
there's a testament to the structure of
that analysis. So you don't have to go
page by page through 150 page
supplemental that there would be some
logical representation of what was
actually done that would make it
comprehensible and reviewable. And we're
not there yet, right? That's not there
aren't norms. There's not software
support in our fields for doing that.
But it's a goal. There are fields that
do have that like mathematics. They do
proofs. Proofs are gigantic. Um they
have software to support them
structurally like this structural
diagram on the right. Mathematicians
make proofs in software where you can
draw the proof as like a diagram like
that. Um, but they also take a year to
review papers. Math is slow. There's
like three people who can review any
given paper and you send it to them and
you wait till they're done, right? In
biology, you want two week review cycles
for 150 page supplementals. And this is
garbage, right? And and uh anyway,
sorry, this is I'm Richard and I'm
ranting this morning, but no, this is
this is a challenge for us. And I say
this this morning to to sort of justify
like how I'm going to present stuff to
you now when we talk about model
expansion and the incremental choices we
go through is I'm trying to support a
path forward from there so that we can
represent and make our work transparent
and comprehensible.
Um so model expansion is one of the key
jobs we do when we do um research
software engineering in the context of
multi-level models.
the first order kinds of expansion
decisions we have is we've got a number
of different kinds of clusters in the
data. Uh pre last week I only had one
kind of cluster. It was tadpole tanks
remember. Um but in most of your data
sets you're going to have different
kinds of clustering. There's hierarchies
inside hierarchies or parallel
hierarchies in the data. And the
question is which ones if any do we want
to cluster by in our statistical
analysis. And then the other kind of
model expansion which you can do at the
same time is adding additional features
which are uh things you're going to
estimate for the clusters.
We'll have examples as we go. So some
examples at the bottom here
um
uh in the context of the tadpoles we had
tanks. Uh a feature we were estimating
for each tank was survival.
Yeah. Does it make sense? Um, you have
blocks in experiments. Uh, you at least
you you always have blocks in
experiments and hopefully you keep track
of them because they're often block
effects, right? Biologists, this is a
curse of our lives. And you might want
to estimate the treatment effect by
block. Uh, individuals are a kind of
cluster. If you have repeat observations
at the individual level um and then a
feature of the individuals will be their
response to some stimulus.
uh departments um are a kind of cluster
uh say if we're looking at graduate
school admissions, PhD program
admissions and features of departments
would be their admission rates. Does
this make sense the distinction? So we
often want to expand in both of these
directions at the same time and there
are different engineering challenges
just doing even one of these but doing
them together presents others and so I
want to support you in that by giving
you some transparent examples not only
in this lecture but also in the next one
about how we do this expansion.
Um when we add clusters uh this adds
more index variables.
Um and then we get more of those
regularizing priors or population prior
is each cluster gets a different
statistical representation of the
variation in that population of
clusters. Yeah. When we add features we
add more parameters per cluster. Um that
is more dimensions in each population
prior. And so the population priors
themselves are going to become
multi-dimensional when you add features.
And we're going to today uh I'm not
going to go all the way into that
because I'm going to do this
incrementally. Uh partly to make it more
understandable and partly because when
you actually do your projects I think
you should follow this incremental
workflow because it makes the software
more reliable and man makes the
complexity more manageable. That's my
excuse. This is the way I work. I do it
incrementally um because you can catch
mistakes that way. But uh by next week
in next week we're going to have uh
multivariate
um Gaussian population priors where
we're modeling the covariant structure
inside the features of the of an
individual cluster type if that makes
sense. It'll make sense when there's an
example. By the end of this lecture
there will be an example to know what
we're going to do in the next lecture
with the coariances but I want to take
my time to do it. Uh but this is my
promise where we're going. Okay. Um, I
just want to remind you uh why we're
bothering multi-level models too and we
always want to keep track of what we
actually want to do because sometimes uh
well because this is how you decide how
to do the expansions, right? Uh do you
need to add a cluster? Do you need to
add a feature? Maybe not. Yeah. Just
because you could is not a good reason.
You have other things to do with your
brain. Yeah. Uh so we want to keep keep
track of exactly what the est demands
are, what the goals are. But quite often
we think about um uh number three on
this list. For example, we estimate
variance. As soon as you have multiple
features, you might want to estimate
covariance.
Uh eventually we're going to get to
social networks in this section. And
that's a case where the the diad level
co-variance in behavior is often of of
key statistical interest because that
represents things like reciprocity in
friendships. Yeah, this really you're
estimating a parameter which is a
covariance feature of the regularizing
prior. So we're we're going someplace
useful. I promise it just maybe does
isn't going to seem like it for a little
while. Um okay, there are practical
difficulties in these workflows. uh
you're going to call them software
engineering challenges. Um some of you
have heard me talk for years about the
way I see science as a form of amateur
software engineering, right? All of us
are doing software engineering, but we
have almost no training in it. Yeah,
it's comforting, isn't it? So I I think
we could be a little bit more
professional about that. So we're going
to talk about incremental development
and testing a little bit as we go too.
Um so in this these software engineering
challenges we want to know we want to
know how to use more than one cluster
type at the same time. How to represent
that in the modeling code and keep track
of the notational complexity. Um how to
calculate predictions from models like
this because hierarchical models you
already had multiple levels of
predictions. You had predictions at the
level of the population of clusters and
predictions at the level of each
individual cluster. Once you add more
clusters and more features, now no
two-dimensional plot is going to
accommodate your predictions. So you
need to think harder about how to how to
deal with the predictions whether
they're in or out of sample and so on.
Um there are engineering challenges in
just getting the estimates efficiently.
Um I keep I think I told you folks
before was it last time or maybe it was
the other section. I'm sorry if I mix
you folks up. um that you're lucky to be
alive at the time you are. I know it
doesn't seem like it if you read the
news this morning, but but you are in
terms of software uh research software
engineering because the math libraries
available to you on your personal
computer are amazing. And even in the
1990s, it wasn't like that. So, it's
much easier than it used to be. But
still, there are challenges and I'm here
to help you with them. Yeah. But it's
much much. You kids have it so easy now
compared to when I was in grad school
and we wrote our Markov chains from
scratch in C. It was awful. Just
absolutely awful. Things are better now.
Now you have math libraries and you just
like do some scripting and go have a cup
of coffee, right?
um but still their challenges and then
uh it won't be this lecture and I don't
think it'll be the next but the one
after that I'm going to spend a good
amount of time talking about a topic
called group level confounding that
comes in in multi-level models as well
so just don't have to worry about what
that means right now but confounding is
always there even in experiments and um
and I want to give you some uh useful
advice on that okay the example data set
for today is um a subset of the 1989
Bangladesh fertility survey. Uh uh I
like this data set uh for teaching for a
lot of reasons that that I think you'll
see as we go through it. Um but it is
it's not the total sample. It's subset
in a way that makes it appealing for
teaching. That is I've manipulated it in
particular ways to create some
interesting examples. But the data are
real. Okay. Um Bangladesh as a case
study is an interesting one because uh
in 1970
um I think typical completed fertility
was something like seven children uh and
now it's like 1.5 or something like
that. It's just fertility maybe not that
low like little below two. It's just
fertility has massively crashed in
Bangladesh. Their demographic transition
was super rapid. It's a really
fascinating uh case study. Um so this
subsample is a little under 2,000 women
in 61 different administrative
districts. Uh the outcome of interest
here is going to be contraceptive use.
This this is a series of interviews done
in women's homes with individual women
about their uh use of contraception and
also their their fertility histories and
demography. I've just given you a subset
of the data but it's a it's a fantastic
uh uh data set. Um, so I've also given
you age, the number of living kids, and
whether their residence is in an urban
center or in a rural village.
Um, structurally, let's think about
building up an analysis of this with
these variables in mind. Uh, one of the
questions I get quite often in teaching
is, okay, so you want us to do causal
modeling. Um, how do I build a DAG?
Yeah, I know some of you I'm looking at
you have come to me and asked these
questions. Yes. And uh and the answer is
very carefully. No. Uh there are
heruristics to help you here. Um but uh
it's much easier if you have scientific
background uh in an area because that
what helps you determine the directions
of the arrows. So, I'm not going to give
you the definitive DAG for this data set
for reasons that I I will make
transparent in a few slides, but
heristically something that I think that
works really well in lots of cases to
get you going is to just write down the
variables first like this. Um, so we
have age, contraceptive use, district,
urbanity, is that a word? Yeah, I don't
know. Sounds like a word. It's a word
today. Uh, and and number of kids. The
sub i subscripts mean this is data that
varies for individual women and without
the little i subscript that's something
that's a district level variable right
so or uh no wait urbanity should be sub
i2 sorry I made a mistake uh but
district is not is not something that
varies by individual women there are a
bunch of women who are in a district
yeah
um then we one thing you can do is you
can say okay let's start by drawing
arrows for causes of interest or things
where we have strong scientific um
models to tell us the direction of
arrows. Uh we you could already argue
here and I'm setting this up so that
maybe you can think about what it means
to do cross-sectional surveys. Um age uh
influences contraceptive use and it
can't be the reverse.
Yeah. Nothing influences age. Age is
this wonderful variable when you do
human research, right? It's it's not
even a real variable. It's just like a
index, a displacement from birth. Yeah,
there are no causal arrows into age.
There's no intervention you can do on
it. Yeah, there's nothing you can do
about that. Um, number of kids
influencing contraceptive use. That's
the interest in these things because
we're doing a cross-sectional survey of
the woman's contraceptive use at this
time conditioning on her existing kids.
It's about the decision to use
contraceptive
that she had the kids. Of course, in the
past, she might have used contraception
uh and that may have affected her family
size, but this is about the prospective
uh effect of varying intervening on
number of kids and whether that would
then change the woman's decision to to
use or not use contraception. Um and
then you think about so these would be
like say the causes of interest if the
reason people were doing the survey.
There will be other variables which we
often call competing causes which may
also influence the outcome. These are
not compounds.
Yeah. Uh there's nothing, you don't have
to put them in an analysis, but if
you're going to draw a structural causal
diagram like this, you want to think
about them because well, they might end
up uh being second order compounds as
we'll see um that district may influence
contraceptive use and living in a city
or not may influence contraceptive use.
What does it mean for district to
influence contraceptive use? Right?
Usually what we mean is there are
unmeasured things about each district
that are influencing the rate of
contraceptive use, right? And we haven't
measured them. We don't know what they
are, but we have repeat samples from
each district. So we have some hope for
estimating those the variation in
contraceptive use. Yeah. question
>> is
because like where the woman is from or
is where is living because
>> it's where she's living
>> isn't that the same
>> there's in each district there's urban
and non- urban
>> yeah so urban varies yeah urbanity
varies within district yeah that's a
good question right um urbanity is also
kind of like district in the sense that
I mean what does it mean to say it's
causal effect Uh but remember in usually
in applied statistics when we talk about
causal effects we're talking about some
hypothetical intervention right it's not
about mechanism. So you could say
there's a causal effect of urban living
without understanding what it really is.
It's that living in a city exposes you
to stuff which influences your attitudes
towards contraception or your ability to
acquire it. uh that you could call that
then the causal effect of urbanity even
without understanding exactly what it is
and that's legitimate in in applied
research uh I think perfectly fine uh
remember I made I think I made a joke
before about the Kreb cycle right so
that there's like the causal model of
the whole system but a causal effect
doesn't require understanding the whole
system right you can still do useful
applied work by thinking about
hypothetical interventions without
understanding exactly what the detailed
mechanisms are and That's good news,
right? Because if you had to understand
the whole world before you could do
interventions, that would suck. Yeah.
Um, is this making sense so far? I'm
going to I want to get through this.
Yeah. Question, Constantine.
>> Yeah. Why is there no error between, for
example, H?
>> I have slides for you.
>> Yes. Excellent question. I'm going
incrementally here.
>> Actually, before I think I missed it.
Why is there only one line between kids
and contraceptive use?
I think you explained it.
>> Um, you wanted it to go both directions.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, I'm gonna
>> Doesn't I want to know why?
>> Yeah. So, the the thing I said before,
I'm going to problematize this in about
three sides slides, I think. But, it's a
great question. This is a
cross-sectional thing where they're
they're they come into women's
household, they do an interview, and
they say, "Are you using contraception
now or do you intend to?" And they they
ask her how many living kids they she
has and what are their ages. So, it's
about prospective contraceptive use
conditioning on kids. Um, obviously her
realized family size now is conditional
on her past contraceptive use or lack
thereof. And that's what you're thinking
of.
>> Yeah. And that's that absolutely I think
it's in three slides or so. I want to
bring this back into our focus to think
about what data like this mean because
we often have cross-sectional data like
this and we want to talk about causal
effects and it's weird because our
mechanistic understanding of these
systems is dynamic but the data are not.
Yeah. So, but I'm going to come back to
this. I I think I'm I love these
questions because it means you're paying
attention to me and I'm flattered. Yeah.
So, this is very nice. Um, I live with a
cat who pays only attention to me when
he wants to eat. So, this is a very nice
experience here lecturing.
Okay, some more arrows. Uh, that some of
you will be happy about this. So, now we
think about relationships among the
causes. We've drawn arrows into the
outcome of interest. You're not done,
right? Because this is the big thing
that I think structural causal diagrams
do is they prompt you or they should
prompt you to think about causal
relationships among the things on the
right hand side.
so to speak and those those
relationships can matter for the proper
design of a statistical model. So uh I
could even put more arrows here and I
will in a moment but let's start simple.
Let's say like urban living affects your
number of kids for uh uh through various
mechanisms. Uh and age also obviously
biologically age affects your your
family size. Yeah it should.
Um, and then, uh, you can think about
what I call unfortunate relationships
among causes. Things like district
influencing kids for unmeasured reasons.
So now we've got confounding by
district. If you want to estimate the
influence of kids.
Yeah.
um or even a series of unfortunate
relationships because uh so far we had
only talked about measured variables and
their relationships but there could be
things you haven't measured like say uh
family which I've put on the left hand
side of this and I've drawn a a dash
circle around it that's a convention for
saying this is an unmeasured variable so
say like the extended family there are
cultures within extended families which
also affect ffect contraceptive use. It
might also affect number of kids
directly. And so there may be
confounding through unmeasured things in
studies of this kind. Yeah, you're
feeling good now. Now, this is just the
reality. When we start modeling, we're
not going to put all this complexity in
right away. We have to manage it. uh but
uh just in the interest of a workflow
for drawing DAGs, I think this kind of
procedure where you you start with
direct causes and then competing causes
and then and then causal relationships
among uh the predictors and then
thinking about confounds both measured
and unmeasured is a productive way to
proceed. Um okay, let's get into
modeling this data set. Uh the first
thing we're going to do is I'm going to
do the tadpole model on these data just
to start because this is the proper
workflow. That's not where we want to
go. Our estim is going to be the effect
of urban living on contraception in each
district. That's what we're going to try
to estimate. Okay? But we're not going
to start there because I'm going to do
responsible software engineering and
we're going to do a simpler model first
and then I'm going to add in the
features to show you the model
expansion. Yeah. And this is my general
advice is unless you're uh the perfect
um research software engineer, it's very
hard to start at the end with the fully
complicated model that you want. It's
very difficult to engineer that
correctly on the first go. I've been
doing this for multiple decades and I
still find it difficult on the first go
to correctly engineer like a model with
two clusters and six features. Like it's
just a lot of code. Yeah. So I like to
layer them in one at a time. Um uh we
want partially pulled estimates. Uh this
is just in terms of the teaching. This
is another chance for you to understand
partial pooling because this data set
has some nice features in terms of
partial pooling. There's a lot of
imbalance. In fact, there's one district
with no women sampled. And I want to
show you what the model says about them.
It's a nice thing about multi-level
models. They'll make predictions for
units with no evidence. Yeah, no problem
at all. Um and eventually we're going to
get to really looking at the variance
and co-variance of the treatment effects
of the of the effects of interest. So we
can talk about the population level as
well. Okay, here's the core basian
workflow. Remember this is the testament
so to speak the logical structure of the
analysis. We've got the beginnings of a
generative model. DAGs are not
generative and I'm going to talk about
that on the next slide but it's the
beginning. Yeah, it's it's like an
essential part of it. you need to
specify structural relationships among
variables to have a generative model. uh
and our estim
um occasionally in this course uh I'm
going to use this do calculus notation
as the effect of um U on C is PC
conditional on do you the P means the
distribution of right so if we
understand the causal effect of urbanity
that means we can say what the
distribution of contraceptive use is
when we intervene
on urban living which is what the do
means. Yeah. When you do urbanity,
right? That's what do calculus is. Does
this help at all? You'll see this
notation in in papers. Uh it's not so
unusual.
Okay. Um about generative models and
this is why I want to come back to the
kids and contraception thing too is DAGs
are not generative. Um they and that's
good and bad. It it's good because uh
the logic of new calculus allows you to
say what is decidable before specifying
distributions and functional responses.
Right? So for any detailed model
generative model that has that structure
on the left there are things you can
decide and that's great. That's a huge
victory. Yeah. The things about
confounding and adjustment sets can be
decided just from the structural
diagram. That's fantastic. That's a
victory. Yeah. And this is this is
really recent. Um when I say how how
recent it is, you're going to be like
that's older than me. Some of you, I
know, but it's from the 80s. Yeah. So
that's really recent. I know some of you
were not alive in the 80s. Like half of
you were not alive in the 80s, but the
80s seem recent to me. And uh but this
is a huge victory to have this. So there
is progress uh in the sciences, right?
in these things. It's only as recent as
the 80s. But there's lots of stuff that
we need to do in research software
engineering which requires more than
that which needs a generative model.
When I talk about generative models, I
don't usually mean a fully generative
model because that's usually not
necessary and usually we don't bother
for generative models for some of the
variables in particular distributions of
kids and things. There's a generative
model for that, but often we wouldn't do
it. Usually we just mean the generative
model for the outcome of interest. But
we'll treat the covariants just as
having some arbitrary distribution.
Yeah, like age. Do you really want a
generative model of age? Sometimes you
do if you're a demographer, but uh often
you don't need it. So we talk about
generative models. Usually they're
partly generative. Um the observation
part of the generative model is usually
not modeled either. Yeah. But there'll
be cases where you need to if you if you
work in polling, you need to model the
observational part because people don't
actually report accurately their
opinions in polls. Yeah. Or there's
non-response bias. Um if you do survival
analysis, you need to deal usually don't
make a generative model of censoring.
Yeah. You just ignore that. So
generative models are usually only
partly generative. Does this make sense?
I This is an important thing in context
like this one with these cross-sectional
studies. the the full generative model
wouldn't even look like the DAG. It
would be some dynamic um life history
model, right? And then you could imagine
taking cross-sectional samples out of
it. Now, that would be a big research
project. Yeah, I know some of you work
on things like this. Uh so you know what
I'm talking about, but that's like a
fully generative model um of this kind
of research context.
Okay, we're not going to do that today.
We're going to focus on the stat model.
Um, we're going to take this structural
diagram as as a a generative model uh
with some distributional assumptions
we'll add in in a minute on the next
slide. And we're going to be interested
in developing a series of three
statistical models. um not because we're
interested in the estimates of each of
these but because this is about
engineering up to the model of interest
avoiding error and also since um this is
a class uh there are things to learn
about the full model by looking
comparing it to the subm models. Yeah,
you understand what the model is doing
better if you do comparison in the
series that you use to engineer it.
Yeah. So this isn't about model
selection. We're not competing these
models against one another. It's a path
to engineer them responsibly and
understand them better. And I think this
is the typical kind of multi-level
workflow actually. At least it should
be. Yeah. Does this make sense? Sorry, I
know I'm sermonizing a bit today, but
this is this is just how I am. Okay,
let's add some distributional
assumptions for the first the tadpole
model reexpressed on Bang uh Bangladeshi
women. Yeah, we're nothing like
tadpoles. I apologize for the
comparison. Um
um but it's just like the tadpole model
and this is this is chosen deliberately
in that we have a binary outcome in
tadpoles. It was survival uh now it's
contraceptive use. We're going to be
this data set is structured so that each
row is a woman however
and um uh we've got a 01 response
whether or not she reports contraceptive
use. And so this is Berni distributed 01
variable with some probability P subi.
And we model the log odds of P subi with
some stuff. Uh for now it's just in each
district what's the log odd average rate
of contraceptive use. And we're going to
do partial pooling. So we have um we
have our population uh parameter below.
Uh we have regularizing prior for the
districts. That's the alpha subj is a
normal distribution with two parameters
inside of it itself. The alpha bar the
average across districts and sigma which
is the standard deviation across
districts. You remember this from last
time? Yeah.
Um and then we have uh hyper prior for
both of those as well.
Um let's look at the code. So in the
book uh and in the lecture I'm using our
code in my own package ulam. Uh but of
course I just want to remind you you're
welcome to use uh PMC or Julia or
whatever you prefer. Uh there's these
these probabilistic programming
frameworks are very similar across
scripting environments these days. And I
think that's nice. So these examples
will translate pretty handily um to the
other things. And on the web page for my
book there's translations into Python
and Julia for these examples too if you
want to if you want to go find them.
Okay. So, we've got the mathematical
version of the model on the right and
we've got the ulam code on the left. And
I just want to highlight the
correspondence. I'm not going to do this
for every example because uh you folks
are are reasonably good at this, I know,
but it's nice sometimes. Yeah. For me to
step through the code. Yeah, you're not
totally bored with it. Okay, good. Um
so, first we've got our outcome
contraceptive use for newly distributed
in the Ulam code. That's exactly how
it's written because that's how I wrote
ulam. So, it looks like math models.
Yeah. Uh so we write it like that and
then we define uh the log odds of P is
um there's a vector of parameters we're
going to define A and we subset it for
the district that each woman is in.
And then we define that vector. There
are 61 districts
in this data set.
So I I make a vector of length 61 and
name it A and I give it a normal
distribution with a mean A bar and a
standard deviation sigma. And then
finally we've got the hyper priors for A
bar and for sigma.
Um
the stand code all U O Ulam does is make
stand. It's a pre-ompiler.
Yes. So, ulam makes stand code and then
the stand code is passed to another
compiler that makes CC code and then
that CC code is passed to another
compiler which makes a binary. Isn't it
fun? It's just layers of compilers now.
That's how it is. So, uh but
occasionally I'm going to show you the
Stan code just to give you some sense of
this and then eventually towards the end
of this section we're going to be
working directly in Stan because it's
just easier to express things. Yeah,
there's just more flexibility. Um, thing
I want to highlight today is just that
if you look at the model block of the
stand code, um, you'll see it's in the
reverse direction from how it's declared
in Ulam. That's because in in the
mathematical statistical notation, you
tend to start, uh, with the things that
depend upon everything else and then at
the very bottom of the notation are the
things that don't depend on anything
else. So like the hyper priors are at
the bottom and the outcome variable
distribution which depends upon all the
other symbols is at the top and that's
how ulam is written but stan executes
code in order in the model block. So the
stuff that depends on everything else
needs to be at the bottom because it
won't be defined yet otherwise and so
it's reversed. Does that make sense?
Yeah. I apologize for this but again why
is ulam written that way? You might be
asking that's because that's how the
stat notation is and you just it's just
the fact that we live in this world
where there are these conventions and
you have and I have to teach them to
you. Yeah. And then eventually you
you're fine with it and it's totally
fine. Yeah. Question.
>> So if I understand correctly um because
like in box for example in the model
section in stamp in in nimble for
example it doesn't matter the order that
you put for vector sigma a bar or does
here matter? Do you have to put vector
at the top and then sigma a bar and a or
In the model section, it doesn't matter.
>> It does matter in the model section
because it things get defined in order.
So you have to declare P at the top
before well you have to declare P. Yeah,
you have to declare P at the top. That's
where variable declarations go in the
block. Um you could switch sigma and a
bar because they don't depend upon
another. But they need to be uh uh and
and then you have to like define that
loop which defines the P's that has to
be before the bottom line because P is
used in the bottom line. Yeah. Does that
make sense? So there's some wiggle room
there. You can move some stuff around.
Uh but but any symbol that needs its
values declared before it needs before
you use it. Yeah. Okay. But there's some
flexibility. All right. If you run this
model, it samples no problem and you get
a lot of parameter estimates. 61 uh log
odds per district. Yeah, no one wants to
look at this stuff, right? So don't
don't look at these tables, but we will
plot them. So let's let's understand
um the variation in this model. Uh so
this are these are not the estimates.
These are the sample sizes per district.
And I just want to show you the
imbalance in this data set. Now of
course this is a subset and yes this is
why I like to teach with this data set
but there's massive imbalance across
data sets. Yeah. Um there are some
districts where there's more than 100
women that were interviewed and then
there's one district I think it's 54
where zero. Uh so you're you're asking
well then Richard why is it in the data
set? It's like so we can make
predictions for it right when I show you
that the model has predictions for that
district even though there were no women
sampled. Yeah.
Um
so here are the raw proportions. So this
is like the the the fixed effects
estimates and you'll see they vary quite
a lot although you there's a central
tendency there you see um there's that
one district uh over on the left where
every woman that was interviewed
reported contraceptive use. So this is
like our tadpole problem. Yeah. Is that
really your expectation that every woman
in that district uses contraception? No,
of course not. So that's one of the
things we get from models like this. Um
there are also districts uh two of them
where zero women uh reported
contraceptive use. Again, there are
probably women in those districts using
contraceptives.
Uh, now let's look at the um partially
pulled estimates. These are just the
posterior means. I'm going to layer in
distributional information. Just hang on
a bit. Um, and you'll see uh like in the
tadpole model, they're shrunk towards
the overall mean. The amount of
shrinkage that is the the difference
between the black dot and the red dot in
each district depends upon both how
extreme
um the the black dot is from the overall
mean and the sample size in that
district. I'll say that again. The the
shrinkage which is the difference
between the um black dot and the red dot
in each district depends both upon how
extreme the black dot is from the mean.
how far towards zero or one it is and
how much evidence there is in that
district, right? Because if you've
interviewed hundreds of women in a
district, even if the it's extreme
there, it's not going to shrink very
much because you've got a lot of
evidence that it's extreme. Does that
make sense? But if it's just like two
women and it's really extreme, then it's
going to shrink a lot because there's
not very much evidence. Does this make
some sense? So, I'm going to show you
this as I layer on in this plot. we can
put on 89% posterior intervals
um just to show you that there's
uncertainty about this. The the
posterior mean is not special. This is
just about summarizing and making
something visual uh be able to see. Um
this hides the the shrinkage a little
bit. It makes it more complex um hard to
see what's going on. And now I'm going
to add the sample sizes and you can see
the extreme ones. So, for example, that
district on the far left where uh all of
the women interviewed reported
contraceptive use, it turns out it was
just two, right? So, there's tremendous
shrinkage in that district. Um uh you've
got similar things for uh the districts
that where women none of the women
reported contraceptive use. Um district
11 and district 49 are the two. District
49 there were only four women. So
there's a lot of shrinkage. The the
prediction for that district is much
closer to the mean. Um the prediction
for district 11 is shrunk but not as
much because there's a lot more
evidence. Does this make sense? So this
is just about understanding the pattern
in the shrinkage and in the estimates
and understanding what's going on. Um
this kind of thing I would call a
posterior predictive check because we're
looking at predictions within sample.
And uh part of what we're doing today is
just trying to understand how shrinkage
works, of course, but there are going to
be cases where you find mistakes through
this, right? There will be weird stuff
that jumps out at you and then it might
turn out there was a coding error
someplace or maybe you'll decide um to
look more closely into some of these
districts because there will be some
district that's quite extreme and you
want to understand why, what's going on.
It's a it's a path forward in your
research to use these posterior
predictions to ask more questions about
the pattern of variation and what uh
what is causing it. Does that make some
sense? Yeah. But I think these plots are
nearly always worth doing. And what do I
mean? I mean this is again this is what
Andrew Gellman calls the secret weapon.
You compare the fixed effects estimates
to the shrinkage estimates and you ask
questions about the differences and
what's creating it in terms of your
model and the sample. Yeah. Question. I
was just wondering um if you would
overlay the fixed effects uncertainties.
Um it's not in general that those are
the fixed effects, right?
>> That's right.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's a good point. Yeah.
The fixed effect uncertainties can be uh
Yeah. fantastically big,
>> but they can also be smaller than those,
right?
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. They can. They can. Um, this
is like the homework that you're
supposed to turn in. Yeah. Yeah. So, uh,
the homework that you folks were going
to turn in today, right? I have the
solution set for that. I'll put that up
later. The BMJ thing. Yeah.
>> Um, a journal that formerly known as the
British Medical Journal, which is now
only known by its initials BMJ. If there
are people here who know this, it's it
was like Prince, right? Um, okay. Uh,
let's look at District 54. District 54
is in this data set because there
because just for this reason of of
having predictions for it, the model is
happy to make a prediction for this
district even though there were no women
interviewed in it. Um, you're getting
the mean across districts.
Yeah, the model doesn't know anything
else about this district yet because we
haven't put any other variables into it
uh or about the women in it because that
we have no women sampled for it. But
it's still happy to make a prediction
and it's the overall prediction. It's
learned from the sample. Yeah, does this
make sense? So, this is like the
anonymous district. Um, this is if you
were going to go start sampling in that
district. This is the prior
for that district. Actually, this is the
prior for every district. This is the
other districts have been updated,
right? Which is a bit weird though
because this prior was learned from the
data. So, I know it's weird, but it all
happens simultaneously in bays like uh
when you have these hierarchical models.
Um,
uh, okay. Notice there's there's a lot
of uncertainty though about what's going
on in that district. It could be almost
anything. Um, all right. I got 15
minutes. Let me let me pick up the pace
a little bit, but I I'll I'll try not to
rush. So, uh, just to summarize this,
this is the tadpole model. Partial
pooling creates shrinkage. We've got the
same basic mechanics of shrinkage that
we had in the last lecture, but the data
set is structured differently, a lot
more imbalance. Um and of course this is
not an experimental data set so there
might be confounding involved too. Um
there's no causal inference yet. All
we've done is stratified the outcome by
district. Yeah. But that's work, right?
That's like the first level. This is
this is in the software engineering.
This is the first level you do. So now
let's think about adding um a particular
variable and also stratifying by uh uh
urbanity as I've called it. Still not
sure that's a word, but um so what is
the effect of urban living? Let's think
about the structural diagram for a
second. Um uh district features could be
potential group level confounds. We're
going to come back to that I think next
lecture and talk about that some more.
I'm going to push that into the
background for the moment, but I don't
want to pass by this without mentioning
it. Um let's think about the adjustment
set for you, right? If if the goal is
the causal inference of the effect of
urban living, what's the adjustment set
for you? Now, since you've all had the
first part of this course or read the
first half of my book because you're in
the experience section, yes, maybe it's
okay. You can you're welcome regardless
of your background here. It's all good.
Um there's this thing about adjustment
sets which I spent a lot of time talking
about in the beginner section but I'm
happy to remind you now is we're trying
to figure out uh for isolating some
particular the effect of some
hypothetical intervention what other
variables do we need to put into the
model to close back door pass that would
bias that estimate. Um and there are
some heristics for doing this. One of
them is called the backdoor criterion.
This is the only thing you can do, but
it's it usually solves in a huge range
of problems. It's all you need. So the
backdoor criterion is to find backd
doors. Back doors are cases where there
are arrows into the treatment of
interest. There are none here, right?
There is no arrow into urban living. Now
maybe in reality there is, but but not
in this model, right? There's no arrow
entering you. So there's no backdoor
path.
Yeah, you could still bias the thing
though by conditioning on other stuff.
Notice that the total causal effect of
you passes through kids. So you must not
stratify by kids
because then you would not get the
causal effect of urban living.
Does that make sense? This is what I
wanted to point out. There's this
tendency in in when when statistics is
taught as it's usually taught where it's
not integrated with causal formal causal
inference. there's this tendency to say,
well, I have all these variables, let me
put them all in the model. Uh, this is a
really bad idea. Uh, because then the
coefficients don't have a meaning. Yeah.
Or at least it's not clear what the
meaning is. You need the structural
diagram to know what the meaning of your
coefficients is or to make decisions
about about model design. So, in this
case, we actually don't want to put uh
kids in or age. Uh, if you put kids in,
now age is a confound like all kinds of
bad things. So it's like Pandora's boxes
opened up and all kinds of strange
things happen. So you need some
discipline about this. Does this make
some sense? There are concerned looks,
there are happy looks, there are blank
expressions. I'm not sure if I'm
reaching what I'm doing. Am I helping? I
don't know. Uh we'll have examples and
we'll go through this. But for the
moment, the idea is we definitely don't
want to put kids in there. If you wanted
to isolate the direct effect of urban
living, then you put kids in, but then
you'd also have to put age in,
right? because age is a conffounded
relationship between kids and
contraceptive use. So, so it's you have
to start adding more and more variables,
but that's decidable through the
backdoor criterion. That's the point I
want to get across. This is not some
art. Yeah, you make assumptions and then
there's an algorithm for for deciding
these things. Um,
oh, and I say is the effect anyway
confounded by D? Remember in the
previous slide I had arrows going from D
to kids and all kinds of things. So
there may still be group level
confounding but I want to come to that
in a later lecture where we can really
spend time on group level confounding.
Okay. Um expand the model. I'm going to
not go straight to the coariance model.
Some of you know where we're going to
end up. Yeah. With a two dimensional
Gaussian distribution for the population
of districts. But we're not going to go
straight there. Um we're going to do
that in the next lecture.
We're going to start just by making an
independent population prior for the
beta parameters here, which are the
effects of uh urban living in the in the
log ods expression. Now I've added a new
term. There's a vector of beta
parameters, one for each district, and
those are multiplied by U subi, which is
a 01 indicator variable for whether the
woman is living in a in a town or city
or in a village. Okay, does it make
sense? So the the U subi effectively
turns on beta and beta is an offset from
the um the district uh uh mean. So you
could say alpha means the average log
odds in a district for a woman not
living in a city and then beta is the
offset when she's living in the city. So
beta is the effect yeah on the log odd
scale uh of living in a city. You with
me? Yeah. Some of you are, some of you
are really happy with this and others
look in pain. Um, I'm going to plot
these. We're going to do posterior
predictions and so I think it'll it'll
it'll work out. Notice the
um there's just a repeated structure.
Now the prior for the betas looks like
the prior for the alphas, but it has
different symbols in it. Yeah, this is
the first place you can make a mistake
in software engineering is by copying
and pasting, right? called copy pasta is
when you make a it's a kind of it's an
error category where you copy paste
something and don't change all the
relevant bits happens all the time this
is why we move incrementally yeah and
discover problems so now we have beta
bar and a new symbol a new Greek letter
toao right eventually we run out of
Greek letters but we use tao why because
it comes right after sigma
that's the only reason yeah and then we
give um beta bar and tao the same hyper
prior as alpha bar and sigma. Um the
model uh is what you'd expect if you
have expectations about things like
this. There's the clone structure, but
again you just need to make sure that
you change all the relevant symbols. Now
have a a vector of of B's uh 61 of them
just like the the A's with a normal
prior.
um when we run this model
uh it does not sample very well and you
get these scary messages about
divergences. Yeah. This this has
happened to you. Yes. Yes. So we're
going to talk about this. I want to
spend the remainder of this lecture uh
the next uh 8 to 10 minutes talking
about these divergences and what to do
about them because this is I mean this
is just what this business is like. You
have to deal with this stuff. This case
you could just run these chains longer.
you'd get more divergences, but the
inferences are fine. It's just messy.
It's an inefficient chain. There are
going to be cases where it's not like
that and it's just a it's a disaster,
right? You get thousands of divergences
and it's a mess. So, it's important to
to teach you um how to how to recode
these things because this is a constant
theme. If you look at the trace plots,
you can see that the sampling's not
great across the four different chains.
The top plot here is the standard trace
plot. This is for Tao um which is the
scale parameter on the on the effects of
interest here. Um the NF is low. It's
only 45. And you can see that the chains
are not exploring exactly the same
places. Some of them are having problems
um wandering around. Yeah. So this is a
kind of characteristic of inefficient uh
exploration of the target distribution.
Yeah. Question.
>> What is NF? NF is the it's an
approximation of the number of effective
samples that the chain represents. So if
the samples were totally uncorrelated
and we were just drawing from a random
number generator without any
autocorrelation
um how how long would the how many
samples would would we have taken from
such a process? So we've actually taken
thousands of samples from these markoff
chains but effectively we have like 40,
right? doesn't I mean sometimes it's
like that you can just run them longer
and eventually get good inference but
the concern is that especially when NF
is very small it's an approximation and
maybe you're not even exploring the
right target distribution so it's better
to do the re-engineering the bottom plot
is this trace rank plot I'm fond of
these and it seems nobody else in the
world is uh but I really like them I
think it's easier to see when the chains
are exploring different areas this way
uh the top plot is the fuzzy caterpillar
right and things overlap and chains can
be bad, but it can they can mask one
another. In the trace rank plot on the
bottom, there's no masking. You just see
the mess, right? A good trace rank plot,
the different colors are constantly
switching. It looks like a tapestry.
Yeah, they're examples in the in the
book, and there'll be examples later on.
Um,
uh, other thing to see in diagnosing
this, um, these are plots that I make
for myself in my own projects. It's just
a plot of the this NF thing at the
parameter level, the number of effective
samples or the effective number of
samples. I have colleagues who say I
should say effective number of samples
and not number of effective samples. But
English has no grammar, so you really
can't hear the difference, can you? Um,
right. It's like central limit theorem,
like what is what is the limit and
what's central? And like there's just
not enough grammar in English to know
what's going on. But anyway, the number
of effective samples um bigger is better
here. And each point is a parameter. Uh
and then the vertical axis is R hat.
This this um uh essentially it's an F
statistic variance ratio. And you want
it to go towards one, right? So that the
variance within and between chains is
the same. And uh that red line is a
danger zone. Points to the left of that
are an alarm warning. I made this plot
for myself. There's a in in the
rethinking package there's a command
called dashboard. It's undocumented, so
use with your own caution, but I use it
all the time in my own work. You're
you're happy to use it. Just give it a
Stan model or an Oola model and it'll
make this plot for you. It makes other
plots too, but it's a dashboard, right?
It's like the first thing I look at
after I run a model. Um, so anyway, this
is this is say that there's some
problems here. Yeah, we've got a lot of
parameters with inflated R hats and
there are a few um particularly the
scale parameters on the far left that
are are sampling very inefficiently.
There's a question.
>> Yeah. Is the number of of effective
samples does it relate with the with the
complexity of the model and the and data
size?
>> Not really. No, I mean it depends upon a
huge range of things. Model structure,
data set, how long you run the chains.
It it depends. There's no simple
statement I can make about it. Uh
actually um the black vertical line
though since you ask uh is the maximum
is the number of samples you get per
parameter because this was four chains
and I think we drew 500 500 samples per
uh the chains are linked a thousand in
the first 500 warm-up. So we're getting
500. Why are some of these above the
number of samples? And that's because
Stan is amazing and it can actually
because of how the Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo explores the target distribution,
it it can sample parameters which are
negatively correlated sequentially. And
so it explores the posterior
distribution faster than random. And so
the effective number of samples really
can be bigger than the number of
samples. Isn't that cool?
So it's not an accident, right? that is
happening inside the same chains for
some parameters as those things on the
left which are crap to use the technical
term. Yeah, but this is but it's not a
mistake. So that's what the black line
is. That's the number of samples and the
red line is danger zone my heristic
danger zone uh area. There was a Kenny
Logan song a long time ago. Some of you
will know. No
Top Gun. Okay, one person. Thank you.
right into
um all right let me finish this up so
what do we do to fix this the the answer
is we we refactor the model so that the
priors are what's called non-entered the
way I have drawn these priors here
here's another dank meme does anybody
even remember MTV exhibit pimp my ride
yes okay a few people yeah so I keep
getting older and you all stay the same
age that's kind of like my my perception
of what teaching is like my memes just
get danker and danker every year. So
this is I apologize. I need to update
these things. So um when they're when
your priors have parameters inside them,
they have priors and priors and that's
what that's one way to see that it's a
hierarchical model because you've got
distributions embedded in distributions.
But that can be challenging to sample
and in this case that's what's causing
uh the inefficiency in sampling. So we
can fix that actually just by factoring
out the factoring the distribution so
they don't have those dependencies. This
is legal. Let me explain to you why. Um
so you've all heard of zcores.
Yes. Uh okay. What is a zcore? So for
any you can define it for any
distribution but we're just going to
focus on normal distributions for now.
Um if we have variables sample from a
normal distribution like the alpha subjs
um we can standardize them so that their
mean is zero and their standard
deviation is one. That collection of
standardized values is are called zcores
for reasons that I don't know but you
know historians of statistics could
could find out on the internet. Yeah. Um
this is the expression for calculating
them. For every alpha subj, we can
define a z subj or z subj if you're not
american
which is alpha subj minus the mean of
all the alphas that is alpha bar divided
by the standard deviation. Now the
standard deviation of the zcores is one
and their mean is zero by construction.
Yeah, this is legal, right? There is
nothing wrong with this. It's totally
fine. Why would you do this? because it
is easy to sample from a distribution
which has mean zero and standard
deviation one.
That's easy to do and it's not dependent
upon other parameters or other
distributions. So we've taken something
that's hierarchical and we've made it
non- hierarchical. So we're going to
reconstruct this model so that it is
defined in terms of zcores. We can get
the alpha js back just by reversing this
formula just by taking the mean alpha
bar and adding each individual zcore
times the standard deviation and we get
the alpha js back.
Yes. Okay.
Um but this means we can define the
prior for the z's by construction as
normal 01 and normal 01 is easy to
sample from and that's what we do. Cool
trick, huh? Adam,
>> when do we get the alpha JS back?
>> Um, you you get them in I'll show you
the model code. You're going to get them
right away. They're right there in the
model. Yeah. Um, all right. So, here's
the two versions of the mathematical
version of the model. Uh, the original
one on the left where we have centered
varying intercepts and the one on the
right where we have what are called
non-entered varying intercepts.
Centering in this case just means are
there parameters inside the prior. It's
not a great term, but we're stuck with
it. Somebody in the 60s called it this,
and there's no escaping it now. I'm
sorry. Yeah. Um, especially says it
means the opposite of what you do with
data when you center it, which means
making its mean zero.
Yeah, it's just statistitians should not
be legally allowed to name things. I
think this is really a problem. But but
you know until the EU gets around to
that regulation.
Um I think recently they said you you
you can't call soy sausage sausage,
right? So once they get that done, maybe
they'll get around to this. But okay. Um
and here's what the Oola model looks
like. Uh there are lines in here for
reconstructing the A's and B's, right?
You see those save vector right? So that
you get them they're in the posterior
distribution even for convenience the
A's and B's. So you're getting results
which look like the non look like the
centered model even though the sampling
is defined on a different space. Um and
then down below uh the zcored effects
they just have normal 01 prior and the
other priors are the same. This is the
same model, but it samples more
efficiently uh because the space that
the chains need to explore has a
different shape. Um here's the proof. If
you run this model now, you get this
really nice trace rank plot. This is
what it should look like. Looks like a
nice tapestry. Yeah. And that's what you
want to see where it zigzags like this.
And the R hats and the NFS are really
good. Um, I'm going to let you folks go
in a second, but I wanted to show you
this animation that illustrates what
this is, the problem this is solving. So
on the left we have the original version
of the problem. Um, when you have a
hierarchical prior, as the scale
parameter gets small, it creates this
funnel. This is what we call it in
statistics that that funnel at the
bottom. And when you run Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo in this, it has trouble
getting into the funnel. And when it
does, sometimes it explodes. That's a
divergence.
Yeah, divergence is when the step size
basically takes it through the surface
and then the simulation explodes. That's
what a divergence is. So those red
points are the divergences. So when Stan
is reporting divergences, it had some
catastrophic event like that inside the
physics simulation. It knows that
because the energy at the start of the
trajectory and the end are different.
That's what a divergence means. What has
diverged is the energy and energy must
be conserved because this is a physical
simulation. Yeah.
It's a closed physical system. So that's
what divergence means. So that's the
funnel problem and that's what's
happening occasionally in the first
version of the model for small values of
toao. That's that funnel and it's hard
to explore it without divergences.
Does this help? This is exactly what's
going on. This is an animation of an
actual Hamiltonian simulation I
handcoded. That's how I made this thing.
The code for this I can give you if
you're interested. Connor,
>> is it hard to sample just because of
like floating point errors and
numerical?
>> No, it's not. It's not. Sometimes that
matters, but it's not a numerical
approximation problem. It's because the
physics simulation has a step size. It's
not actually smooth. And the there's no
when there's big changes in curvature
across in that space like that on the
left, there's no single step size which
is optimal everywhere. You want a big
step size in the big flat area at the
top and you want a tiny little step size
in the funnel. So you can make the step
size tiny
and then you get fewer divergences, but
then the chain takes forever to explore,
right? So there's it's just trade-offs.
It's just all trade-offs like that. This
is simplified because it's a
two-dimensional example. Our example is
actually many more dimensions, right?
So, we're talking about 61 districts,
two scale parameters, some means, but I
can't plot that, right? It's like you
can do like two dimensions, three
dimensions, maybe. I can't really read
3D plots. I don't know if anybody else
can. I have trouble. And then four
dimensions, what do you do? You like
stare at a threedimensional plot and
think about four a lot. What? No one can
do this. Yeah. So, but it's this is
actually a much higher dimensional
problem. And there are funnels in
multiple dimensions simultaneously
inside these posterior distributions.
But I wanted to give you some cartoonish
I mean this is not a cartoon. This is a
real simulation I'm showing you but
about what is happening and why
divergences happen. Okay. Um
on the right now we've got one where
I've done the zcore trick and I'm
running two chains simultaneously on
this one because I think it's it's
poetic and it looks cool. But but you
write the code for one you can you've
got the other one for free. So uh and
again these are Hamiltonian things. It's
the same model but now it's all a 01
Gaussian in every direction. And so now
it's just like a big hyperbol right like
this big spheres and it's very easy to
sample from that without because there's
no funnel. We've gotten rid of the
funnel. Does this help? Does this make
some sense? I want to demystify this for
you about why this trick it's not a
trick. It's totally legal and it makes
the chain more efficient. Um Sarah So if
transition or divergences are when
there's low energy at the end of a chain
is the the low EMFI
is low energy at either end of the
chain.
>> They're they're not exact. It's the
divergence isn't is is just that the
energy is different.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. But it could be higher or lower at
the end and then that's an additional
diagnostic we could talk about. You can
have happy d no divergences and still
>> yes
>> that's right that's a different issue
but yes you're right thank you uh I
don't want to since I'm since I'm seven
minutes over I don't want to talk about
that but that's a great question but
it's a different issue yeah divergence
just means it's different and it could
be up or up or down um uh and and
there's other diagnostics that have to
do with energy as well like the
distribution of energy is also
informative about the quality of the
chain there was another question
>> yeah yeah just
I mean this Core trick is incredibly
useful. Uh can you can you apply other
restrictions to it or or because I mean
>> you can do it in a I'm not I always
hesitate to say you can do anything
always because it's hard for me to think
about all cases. You can do it for
things that aren't Gaussian even as long
as you can factor out you can usually
factor out the scale or something. So
like exponential distributions can be
standardized. So you can do it you can
do this sort of decentering for lots of
distributions as long as you can factor
things out. So algebra tells you whether
you it's legal or not. That's I know
that's a flippant answer but uh if you
ever have problems like this uh with
sampling uh my door is open right I
spend a lot of time those of you in my
department know uh one part of my job is
people bring me their stand code that's
not sampling efficiently and then I
rewrite it and return it to them and it
makes no sense but it runs better.
Right? There's now a bunch of extra
lines and there's some matrix algebra
and no one can read it anymore, but it
samples real smooth. Yeah, that's my
job. That's not your job. Okay, so don't
don't hit your head against the desk
trying to do that. Bring it to me. Okay.
Um All right, I want to finish this up.
when we we have these estimates for
urban now and plot these in blue on the
bottom um uh and their shrinkage of
course uh for urban as well and it
corresponds to all the standard effects
of shrinkage uh that you're used to uh
no surprises here um what I want to show
you before I let you go is we have
variance components now for both two uh
the posterior distribution for the
standard deviation across women living
in rural parts of their districts that's
red is well identified by the data and
it's lower on average than the standard
deviation for urban but the standard dev
urban is not so well identified by the
sample. Now it's not the prior. I've
plotted the prior there for you as well.
That's the dash black line. That's the
prior for both. So there is information
about it. So it it is larger uh almost
certainly but it's there's not a ton of
information to exactly locate it. These
kinds of plots where you plot posterior
distribution against the prior are
really useful especially for variance
components because sometimes the data
just don't tell you the variance across
units but inference requires some
knowing something about the variance
across units. So these plots I really
recommend for these higher order
parameters like variance components and
coariances and correlations looking at
the posterior against the prior to see
if you've actually learned anything from
the data because sometimes you don't.
Yeah, you can identify a causal effect
of interest and still not be able to
learn the covariant structure of the
data set because you just need more data
to do that. Um, let's plot uh uh
posterior predictions on the horizontal
axis are the um by district means for uh
the rural portions of the district and
on the vertical for the urban parts of
the district. um uh there's a positive
correlation across districts
in the posterior. Uh now there's no
parameter in the model for this
correlation, but when you come back next
time, there will be. We're going to
model it. Um uh and not only that, but
you can look at the uncertainty bounds
around these things, too. Here's for
every district, and this is a mess. So,
let me just show you for a sample of
like 10 of them. These are uncertainty
ellipses. So the posterior distribution
of these two things together there's
correlated uncertainty. Yeah. So there's
co-variance in uh it across districts in
these effects. And uh this turns out
that we can do stuff with that
information when we put it into the
model. So when you come back next time,
I apologize for going over by 10
minutes. I do uh we're going to pick up
with this model exactly here. We're
going to model that coariance. We're
going to add that into the model by
making a multi-dimensional population
prior uh and go forward from there and
continue. Uh thanks for your attention
and I'll see you next time.